(upbeat music)
The other huge use case
for working with async, await and promises
is fetching data from what's called an API.
Now an API is kind of a generic term that's thrown around.
It stands for application programming interface,
but essentially, what that is is some way
that you can talk to a machine
in a somewhat of a standardized procedure.
So if you're building an app,
and it doesn't have to be a web app,
could be in JavaScript, could be an iPhone app,
could be an Android app.
if you're building any type of app, that app, the client,
in our case the client will be the browser,
it might be an iPhone app, might be something,
that needs to talk with the server that exists somewhere.
So if you have a Twitter app, you need to be able
to pull down your most recent tweets,
you need to be able to send tweets,
you need to be able to like tweets,
you need be able to delete tweets and to reply to them,
and all of that, all of that functionality,
is based upon what is called an API.
And most services that have a public-facing website
will try to surface their data
and surface their functionality via an API.
Now, I'm gonna show you some real simple ones off the bat.
Probably as a web developer, a lot of what you're going
to be doing is just pulling down data.
There's the ability to push data to a server with APIs,
but we're gonna start by just looking at
how can I go to some other service,
like I'm gonna show you an example here
with a pizza as well as GitHub.
How do I pull that data into my application
and then go ahead and display it?
Now, probably the most popular way
to pull data from an existing website is that,
first of all, they have to offer an API,
because the other solution to something is just a website,
and if you wanna be able to pull data from a website,
like a list of pizza recipes, or here I'm going to have
some information about my GitHub profile,
if you wanna be able to pull that data from GitHub,
then they have to offer up what is called an API.
And the API is just a URL that you can hit
with some associated data, like in this case,
I'm passing "pizza," in this case, I'm passing "wesbos,"
and then that API will respond
with what is called JSON.
Now, we've talked about JSON a few times.
We'll go over it real quick.
JSON stands for JavaScript object notation,
and it's just a good way to transport JavaScript objects
from server to server or server to client.
Because the way that it works is, if you go to an API,
go with me to API.github.com/users/wesbos,
and this is the GitHub API.
Now, you probably see something
a little bit something like this.
When I refresh it, I get this
nicely formatted thing right here.
That's because I'm using
a Chrome extension called JSON Viewer.
I would probably recommend that you install that
if you're gonna be working with an API.
Now, what comes back from that is not a JavaScript object.
If we click on this raw here, it's actually just a string,
and if I take that string and put it into a variable,
let me open up my dev tools here, and I say
const data is equal to, and give me some back-ticks
and paste it in, now I've got data.
And what is it?
It's just a huge string.
Never mind this formatting here.
It looks like it's an object, but it is just a string.
We can do typeof data is equal to a string
and if I wanted to grab one of these properties on here
like company, .company, this is undefined,
because that is just a string.
So a server will just give you a string
and then it's up to you, the developer,
to turn it back into JavaScript object,
so you can access that thing.
So what we do is we wrap it in JSON.parse
and that will return to us a proper object,
so we could store that in a variable.
So const data object, Obj.
Then I have data object.
Now that I can go ahead and access the company,
no problem, and the login.
It's all the information about that user.
Now, what's great about that there's lots of APIs
will allow you to pull the data
from their server into your own.
There are many that do not allow it
and there are many that require API keys.
We'll go into that, but for now we're just gonna work
with what's called wide-open APIs
that don't require any authentication.
So let's go over here and
let's go into our playground folder
and make a new file called apis.html.
You'll often hear this what we're doing here
referred to as AJAX.
And you might be thinking like,
what the heck is AJAX?
Well AJAX stands for a Asynchronous JavaScript And XML.
And so like let's go through that.
Async, we know what async is, good.
We know what JavaScript is.
And, well we know what And is
and XML, okay.
What's that?
Well, XML is another way that you can receive data
and it looks a lot like HTML,
but it's this other thing called XML.
I have not seen XML in many, many years.
And it's very, very unlikely you will run into it
unless you go work at a large bank
that has not updated anything in the past,
like I've been doing this like what, 12 years
and I've almost never had it to do it.
Only once have I had to work with an XML API.
So that's why it's called AJAX,
but essentially when people say AJAX
they mean fetching data from an API
and displaying it on the page.
So let's go into this.
Let's give ourselves our html base
and we'll call that APIs
and give ourselves a script tag.
And first thing that we need to do
is I like to store the URL in a variable.
This is not necessary, but it's just much easier.
So let's say const and we'll call that,
that's called an endpoint.
An endpoint is a nice, fancy word for the URL
that you need to visit in order to get the data.
So say endpoint is equal to, put that in some strings.
It doesn't matter if it's in back-ticks or double strings.
It would matter if we were doing like
const user is equal to wesbos
and then if that was the case we would need to use
back-ticks to interpolate in there.
I'm gonna keep it simple here though.
Then, in order to get that data, we use a library
that was actually in...
It's not even a library, it's part of JavaScript
in the browser and it's called fetch.
There're some other libraries that are used
specifically Axios is good,
but the fetch library is very, very good
and it comes built in to all browsers which is great.
So the way that it works is
let's say fetch and then we give it the endpoint
that you want and then what that will return
to you is a promise.
WesPromise is equal to fetch the endpoint
and let's console.log wesPromise
and open that up in the browser.
Let's take a look.
You see, we've got our promise here
and you can see that this has worked
cause if you go to your network tab,
and give it a refresh, you'll see that this network tab
will show you all of the requests
that have happened on the page.
So, we request APIs, html.
I requested some CSS.
I requested this data, this is the wavy background pattern
and then also I requested api.github.com
and you can see that it actually got sent out.
And then you can see when it comes back,
it comes back with all of the data.
So if we wanna get that data back into JavaScript,
how do we do it?
Well, we can say wesPromise dot then data
and we'll just console.log the data.
We'll also should put a catch on here.
Let's make a quick a little handle error function.
Because debugging APIs is hard, and if you don't have
proper error handling set up, it's even harder.
Oh, no, best error handler ever.
And we log the error there.
Catch handle error, okay.
Now when I refresh this, we don't get the promise anymore,
because I'm not logging that.
We get this data, which is a response.
Okay, open that up.
It tells me the type cors.
We'll talk about what cors is in just a second.
It's not the terrible beer.
URL, redirected, header, where's my data?
Body, locked, is it in here?
PipeThrough, headers?
No it's nowhere to be found, huh.
Where's my data?
Well this is sort of a two-part thing that needs to happen.
We get the response, you can name this whatever you want.
I've named it response.
And that comes streaming in to the browser,
meaning it's not fully downloaded and also
what has to happen at this point is that
it's not assumed that the data that is coming back
is going to be JSON because you can use fetch to fetch
any type of data.
It might just be raw text that's coming from a page.
It could be an image that you're trying to download
from another page.
There's all kinds of different use cases
for the type of data that would be downloaded
so in our case, we need to tell the browser
when this thing is done downloading,
go ahead and convert in from JSON to
a JavaScript object.
What we do is we take this response
and if you look at the prototype, you'll see
there is a number of methods on this response.
ArrayBuffer, clone, blob, formData, text,
see these are different types of responses.
In our case, we're looking for JSON.
So what we'll do is we'll simply return
the response dot JSON and what response that JSON will do
is it returns another promise.
So we can go here and get ourselves another dot then
and in that case we'll have the actual data.
And I'll console.log the data.
And there we go, after a split second you see
that we have the full object.
There's no need to JSON dot parse it here
because this will do that for you.
So it's a double promise.
The first one gets the response and the second one
gets the response and turns it into JSON for us,
which is great.
So you see the data that is in there ane we can go ahead
and console.log data dot blog, data dot name,
data dot location and you'll see
we have all of that data that is in there.
Okay.
Let's go and display some information about the user.
So if I have a paragraph tag here that says class of user,
we'll select the user on page load.
User P, the paragraph, or user L, that's better.
Don't assume it's a paragraph cause if that changes,
then your variables are out of data.
Document dot query selector dot user.
Then we'll go down here and say user L dot text content
is equal to, we'll use back-ticks, say data dot name, and
data dot blog.
Now when I fresh it, you see that it pops up.
One thing you could do is when it first starts
you could set it to loading.
So say user L dot text content is equal to loading,
that's how you would set a loading state
you could show a spinner there, you could fade it out.
And you will see on page on page load,
it shows me loading real quick.
And then when the data finally does come back
from the browser, it displays it directly on the page.
Now, let's refactor this to async await
because I quite honestly think that'll be much nicer.
So first let's bring these variables to the top here.
Then let's make an async function
called display user.
Let's actually take in a user name.
Then we will bring all of this code up in here.
And let's go line by line.
So that's fine.
The promise a fetch of endpoint can now be switched to
await, and that no longer is a promise,
but it is the response.
Then we say const data is equal to await response dot JSON.
And get rid of all that.
Get rid of this last one.
And I believe that should be it.
The only thing left is that we need to call
this display user on page load.
So let's go ahead and display the user.
We said we would pass it wesbos.
It's not hooked up for that yet, but let's try it.
There it still works exactly the same.
Now what we could do is we could modify this a little bit
where what I would do in this case is
I would change my endpoint to base endpoint
and that is just api.github.com/
and then I might make a sub endpoint for users.
Users endpoint is equal to
the base endpoint.
And this needs to be back-ticks forward slash users.
Actually I'm gonna take the forward slash off.
It just added on when you need it.
And then what we can do in here is we'll fetch
the users endpoint forward slash,
the user name that was passed in.
And what that will do is it'll allow us
to generate the endpoint
on the fly based on what we we've passed in here.
Still works just great.
Let's try it with Scott.
Woohoo, look at that.
So you see how we can just go ahead and fetch the data
and put it in there.
One thing we're not doing here is we're not catching
the error.
So catch with the handle error,
and that's important because if something
were to go wrong, let's botch this.
API dot grubhub.
That's taking forever to load.
If we go to the network you'll see
we're waiting for that response.
You can filter for just AJAX requests
by clicking on XHR.
And see in our dev tools here, it says
Oh No, failed to fetch.
So if that was the case, what we could do
in our handle error is simply take
user L and we'll update the text content to
something when wrong
and we could even show the user
what went wrong.
Sometimes you do wanna show them what went wrong.
Sometimes you don't, depends on how helpful it is.
But in our case, we say error.
It takes a second to fail.
There we go, it worked.
Something went wrong, type error, failed to fetch.
Good, good, good.
I'll bring that back to github.com.
Let's do one more example with this recipe puppy.
So finding APIs is a bit of a tricky thing
because a lot of them require API keys
or they don't work cross-domain.
We'll talk about both of those,
but there's this really good list
called Public APIs.
It's github.com/publicAPIs/publicAPIs.
I've actually contributed to this quite a bit
with my list of favorite ones
and you can sort of just scroll through
and find different APIs,
stuff for everything.
Currency, data validation, web development,
finance, events, news, you get the point.
There's APIs for everything,
so you could just build a little application
that displays data based on your interest.
In the next video, we're gonna build
a little recipe fetcher just to show you
how cors works and how we can
get around cors issues sometimes
and I think we'll learn a lot in that.
And then we'll build a bunch more examples
working with this APIs.